(abrupt loud guitar)
One really nice thing that CSS grid is good for
is when you have an application rather than a website.
And I mean that, like when the entire browser
is multiple windows sometimes you got scrolling
and you got different parts and pieces
and it all needs to fit into
however big the actual view port is.
And CodePen is a great example of this,
where you've got your title,
you've got all these different places to write your code,
you have a preview window,
you've got some settings down here.
So, what we're going to be doing in this exercise
is creating CodePen from scratch.
So I've started you off with some HTML.
And the idea behind the HTML,
let's do a quick inspect element on this,
is that it's four main parts.
So if you look we have a div of the class of CodePen
that's the entire thing.
And then inside of that we have our pen
which is sort of the header,
we have the code which is the the three panes,
the preview which is like just an iFrame to preview it,
and the settings which is the little bar at the bottom here.
And then inside of each of those
they are all their sort of smaller subset grids.
So if this is something you would like to maybe try yourself
please go ahead and give it a shot.
I did do it entirely in CSS grid
though there's a lot of use cases
where you could use FlexBox as well.
So let's open up style-START
if you're going to go ahead with me.
And I've provided you with very minimal
there's no grid stuff this is just sort of your base
setting the font size and the color and whatnot.
So going to open this one up, CodePen start.
Good, so this is what we're looking at
and let's actually go ahead and start with the main CodePen
and we're going to dice it up into different pieces.
So how big are these things going to be?
Well the four different pieces are,
I want the header to take up as much room as it needs.
I want the footer to take up as much room as it needs.
And then these two ones I just want to sort of
split the difference between the two.
And real CodePen you're able to resize it and whatnot
cause they use some JavaScript.
But I did my best with just CSS,
it's as far as I could get it and there's no vertical resize
but if you'd like to add some JavaScript you can.
So we're going to grab our CodePen,
and we're going to display grid on that.
Then we need to cut it up into the four different pieces
and in this case it's not actually columns
it's going to be rows.
So GTR grid template rows,
and we want it to be auto, the first one to be auto size.
The next one to be 1fr, the next one 1fr and then auto.
And what that should do,
it's a little bit hard to see it.
So first we're going to have to be closing our dev tools
so we can get the full look of what it's like.
And then we'll also take our CodePen
each of the direct descendants each of the items
and we'll just put a border one pixel of black
just so we can see where each of the items is.
Now this is not working because shouldn't this code
assets and commands, shouldn't that be at the bottom?
And that's because the CodePen doesn't have a height on it
and you need an explicit height in order for it to work.
So what we're going to do is
we're going to put a height on it.
And the height of that is just going to be 100vh,
which is the view port height that will be 100 percent high.
And we give that a save view you'll now see that
it's sticking to the bottom sticking to the top.
And then the difference between the two are then split.
Now let's move on.
Let's do this right here which is the editors that we have.
So that has a class of code on it.
And we can inspect element real quick on that.
See we have div with a class of code.
And then we have three items which is editor, editor, editor
for each multi ss and JavaScript.
So we can display grid on that.
And then we will equally size them
with grid template columns and we'll repeat 3 1fr.
And that will put them all side by side.
Good I'm pretty happy with that.
Now let's move up to this head right here.
So header with a class of pen.
So we'll go down here .pen,
and we need...let's look at what the different pieces
of code are inside of it.
We've got the pen details and beside that we have
a bunch of buttons, and this is very similar
to the one that we looked at earlier
when we looked at the FlexBox versus the grid.
And what the pen details take up as much room as it can
minus whatever size the buttons and the avatar are in.
So display grid right there.
Grid template columns 1fr,
we'll do the same thing that we did previously.
And then grid autoflow column.
And what that will do is it will stick
all the additional items to the right there.
Now these are being stretched,
the image is not being stretched
so we can align items center
and that will get us in a good spot for there.
We'll deal with some...
Here I'll put a little bit of grid gap on there as well 10px
bump them off from each other.
Good, I'm really happy with that.
So that was the header, we did the code.
The preview we need we've got an iFrame in here
we want that to sort of span the entire place.
And all we need for that is preview display grid.
And by default it will be one column by one column
and the default item is stretched so there's nothing else
that we need to do for that specific one.
And then the settings here there's no need to do the grid.
So good, we just did the entire layout here
by just saying grid three times and laying them out.
Now let's go to get into each of the individual ones,
and start working with it so.
Let's start at the top here
and start some styling on Some Amazing Pen name.
And that again, that is our pen.
We'll do background black,
border bottom 5px solid.
And the CodePen color is 3,4, 3,4, 3,6.
And that's actually a color we use fairly often
so let's put that into a variable called gray.
And then let's go up to the top here,
on the root selector and set the variable gray to be that.
Did I spell that wrong g-r-e-y g-r-e-y good.
In Canada sometimes they spell it with an A.
And a padding of 10px on that header.
Good now header's looking in pretty good shape,
I'm pretty happy with that it's all nicely aligned.
Let's go ahead and style the buttons,
and they each have a class of button.
So the background of each of our buttons is going to be
the variable gray border zero,
color white padding 10px,
and a border radius of 10px.
no that's too much, 5px good.
And a font size of 15px.
Awesome, looking pretty pretty good to me.
We also have the concept of small buttons down here.
So what I'm going to do that
is say anything with a button that has a small on it
we're simply just going to change the font size to 12,
and make the padding 4px.
Okay we've got these little buttons down here,
and these little buttons here,
and then these are our regular large buttons.
Good, also this button right here has a class
of dirty on it if you look at the answer here,
it'll give us this little (sliding voop sound).
So what we can do is select a button that has a dirty state.
And in order to get this little line right here,
what I've done is I've used a before attribute.
So we'll say before and the background after that
is going to be yellow,
It's my yellow ffc600.
And we'll do the whole song and dance
if you've used a before before.
So let's say display block content nothing
height 2px, width it's going to be a 100 percent.
But we don't want it to go all the way across.
Here let's actually look at what we're dealing with there.
It looks pretty good.
But we're going to make it position absolute,
and from the left it's going to be 3px.
So now we run into a bit an issue where it's going
all the way across so we back up to our button,
and make that position relative
and that will put it inside of it.
But the problem is that if the button is a 100 percent wide
then it goes all the way across.
But we want it to go start from three pixels over.
So really we want it 100 pixels less six,
three pixels on each side.
So we can use calc for that, so 100 percent minus 6px.
Looking good.
And then on top 3px as well.
Good, I'm happy with that.
Now let's move on these editors here.
Each editor in itself we open some of those up,
but not the code go into the editor.
The editor header itself needs to be side by side.
See if you look at this editor header we've got
the little drop down on the right,
whereas the rest of the items are over here.
So the way we can do that is grab the editor header,
display grid on that.
And we will give ourselves three columns,
Auto 1fr and auto.
And what that should do
is the middle item here the CSS,
that will span as wide as it needs to
less the size of the button,
buttons on the right and the left.
Good but I don't want the buttons,
the buttons are currently now stretching
so how do I do that, we'll justify items center,
no that's not what I wanted.
It's align items center.
There we go they're no longer stretching.
Put a little bit of padding on the header,
5px looking good.
And we'll also put some grid gap 5px on that.
Good now just a little bit of color.
Background is going to be RGBA 0,0,0,0.1.
And what's that's going to do
is it's going to sort of see through whatever
the actual background of the editor is.
So let's go back up to maybe we'll put the selector
with our editor so we don't get too gnarly.
Where did our editor, oh it's the code here's
editor pen header, put that in there.
Now each of our code blocks the background to that.
It's going to be # and I just pulled this off of
the CodePen website 1b2b34.
That causes this to be unreadable.
Let's actually just go up to CodePen
and just set the color to be white on that in general.
And that'll make everything white
that's generally what we need happening
rather than having to reset it on each one.
Good now let's go to the editor,
and that's each individual one we have three editors.
And of the editors we have editor header,
and then we have this editor code which should be the rest.
And you see that it's currently not
being as high as it should be,
it should take up this entire space.
So we need to now make the editor itself display grid,
and we want the header to take up as much room as it needs.
And then we want the code to take up the rest of the room.
So say grid template rows one or auto, that's the header
and then 1fr to take up the rest.
And that didn't seem like it did much
but now if you hover over top of the header in the code,
you'll see that they are now taking up the entire space.
And then the editor code in itself
also needs to be display grid because the child of the code,
which is there is the gutter,
and then there is the input
so those two things now need to go below each other.
So editor code,
that one will be displayed grid,
and the gutter is going to be very, very small.
And then this text area is gonna take up the rest
of the area.
So let's say grid, template, columns,
auto 1fr.
(whistling)
Starting to look good.
Oh the reason why this one didn't expand is because
I've been,
I was playing with it and then I set it
inline width to it,
which is not what we want.
So I'm just gonna delete that,
and you'll see that it goes back
and snaps too.
The gutter is going to be as wide as it needs to be
and we're gonna take these spans
or the class of the line number
and we're gonna make them blocks,
so that they go onto their own lines.
So we'll grab the class on each of those numbers,
editor number, display block.
And that should make them stack.
And I believe,
put a little bit of padding on either side of that,
good.
Now let's go to our editor input,
this little text area that we have here.
As a class of editor input.
We're going to make it resize none,
take off that little thing.
Background, none.
Border zero.
Color, gray.
Make the font size 16.
And line height 25.
I was just playing around with that.
Whoa.
PX.
That's not any good,
you see it's not lining up here.
All right you're probably at the,
there's probably some scientific way to line it up,
but I'm just gonna cheat it.
Ah good enough.
19.
Yeah 19 pixels looks good to me.
So it's lining up.
What else do we have to do here?
I think, oh we got this footer here.
I think we're done
all of the alignment stuff using grid
and I think that the last little piece is to go down
to this last little one which is the settings.
Here and say settings.
Padding.
Put a little maybe 10PX on that.
That's too much.
5PX?
Good, good.
Background is going to be that gray color.
Good,
no that's the same color as the,
make it just black.
Good.
And border dash top when PX solid gray.
Looking good.
There's a couple little things if you look at the answer,
I've got a couple more borders here and there
and whatnot,
but I'll let you spend some time finessing
the borders and whatnot.
The idea here is that we built all of this stuff with grid
and we're actually making it look pretty good.
It's pretty easy to snap together an application
that seems relatively complex just with using grid
nested inside of each other a couple times over.
So hopefully you enjoyed that one.
I'll see you in the next one.
(upbeat music)